\input texinfo
@setfilename foo
@documentencoding UTF-8

@c
@c See the AUTHORS.sh script for an explanation of this file.
@c

This file contains a list of people who have worked on TGICMP@.
The list is sorted chronologically and summarizes each person's work.
Commit counts generally indicate how much work a person has done, but
should be taken with a grain of salt as some people divide their work
into smaller commits than others. The intent is only to give a general
picture of the authorship history.

The list is generated from the TGICMP Git repository,
which contains the complete historical record of the project. The
repository should be easy to find by searching the Internet or by
visiting one of the following mirrors:

@itemize
@item @url{http://sourceforge.net/p/quinngrier/tgicmp}
@item @url{https://bitbucket.org/quinngrier/tgicmp}
@item @url{https://github.com/quinngrier/tgicmp}
@item @url{https://gitlab.com/quinngrier/tgicmp}
@end itemize

@c
@c We don't put any blank lines before @bye because they seem to be
@c maintained by makeinfo --plaintext.
@c

The list follows.
@bye

@c
@c The authors of this file have waived all copyright and
@c related or neighboring rights to the extent permitted by
@c law as described by the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain
@c Dedication. You should have received a copy of the full
@c dedication along with this file, typically as a file
@c named <CC0-1.0.txt>. If not, it may be available at
@c <https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/>.
@c
