\input texinfo
@setfilename tgicmp.info
@documentencoding UTF-8
@include PACKAGE.texi
@settitle TGICMP @value{VERSION}

@include CC0-1.0.copying.texi

@titlepage
@title TGICMP
@subtitle Type-Generic Integer Comparisons in C
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{DATE}
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top TGICMP

This manual is for TGICMP @value{VERSION} (@value{DATE}), a library for
performing type-generic integer comparisons in C@.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Authors::
* Copying::
* Mirrors::
* News::
* The CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication: CC0.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@node Authors
@appendix Authors

This appendix contains a list of people who have worked on TGICMP@.
The list is in chronological order and also summarizes each person's
activity. A person's commit count generally indicates how much work they
have done but should be taken with a grain of salt as some people spread
equal work over more commits than others. The commit count is also shown
as the percentage of all commits.

The list is generated from the TGICMP Git repository,
which contains the complete history of the project. For information on
downloading the repository, @pxref{Mirrors}.

The list follows.

@include AUTHORS.texi

@node Copying
@appendix Copying

The authors of TGICMP have waived all copyright and
related or neighboring rights to the extent permitted by
law as described by the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain
Dedication. For the full dedication, @pxref{CC0}.
It may also be available at
@url{https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/}.

@node Mirrors
@appendix Mirrors

This appendix contains a list of mirrors from which the TGICMP
Git repository can be downloaded. The list is in no particular order.
Most mirrors also provide a web interface for browsing the repository
with a web browser.

The list follows.

@include MIRRORS.texi

@node News
@appendix News

This appendix contains a list of the major changes introduced in each
version of TGICMP@.
The list is in reverse chronological order. For a more detailed list of
individual changes, see the @file{ChangeLog} file or the Git repository,
which contains the complete history of the project. For information on
downloading the repository, @pxref{Mirrors}.

The list follows.

@include NEWS.texi

@include CC0-1.0.appendix.texi

@bye

@c
@c The authors of this file have waived all copyright and
@c related or neighboring rights to the extent permitted by
@c law as described by the CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain
@c Dedication. You should have received a copy of the full
@c dedication along with this file, typically as a file
@c named <CC0-1.0.txt>. If not, it may be available at
@c <https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/>.
@c
